Let's talk about lifecycle management with Helm. Now lifecycle management can sound like a fancy
technical term that's too abstract to understand at first glance. So let's translate it into plain
English by taking a look at some practical examples. Now, each time we pull in a chart
and install it, a release is created. As discussed in the previous lessons,
a release is somewhat similar to an app. But more specifically, it represents a package or a
collection of Kubernetes objects. Now since Helm knows what Kubernetes objects belong to each
release, it can do things like upgrades, downgrades or uninstalls without touching objects
that might belong to other releases. So each release can be managed independently,
even if they're all based on the same chart. Now let's just create a new release and discuss this
as we go along. So we'll install a pretty old version of this NGINX chart. By the way, you can
pass in a specific version of a Helm chart to install using the version option in the install command
like this. We now have an NGINX release, plainly called NGINX release. And now imagine two months
go by, which is a long time for any piece of software, but especially for a website,
a lot of security vulnerabilities get discovered and they need to be patched up. Now our NGINX
hosted website may have many objects in our Kubernetes cluster. When we upgrade the Pods
running NGINX. Maybe we also need to make some changes to other Kubernetes objects. For example,
the newer version of NGINX may require a new environment variable to be set or new secret
to be created, which requires changing configuration objects and other files part of
the manifest files. But it may be hard to keep track of all pieces that need to be changed.
Fortunately, as we said, Helm keeps track of everything associated with a release. So we
don't have to upgrade our objects one by one, Helm can automatically upgrade them all with one single
command. But first, let's see what version of nginx is running in our Pod, we initially have
to find out the name of our nginx Pod. So we run the kubectl get Pods command to see the Pod that
we created. Then we run a kubectl describe Pod command to see more details about the image. And
we see that it's running nginx version 1.19.2. So that's pretty old. Now let's see a Helm upgrade
in action. The command is rather simple. So we just tell Helm what release we want to upgrade.
And then specify the chart that this release is based on. So we now run the Helm upgrade command
to upgrade the nginx release. So revision one is now replaced by revision two. Note the revision number
in the output of the Helm upgrade command. So did the Helm upgrade command really do its job? Let's
check. In the upgrade process, the old pod gets destroyed and a new one gets created. So we need
to get the name of the new one. So we follow the same Helm process again and get the new pod name,
then run a describe on it. And we see the new version which is nginx 1.21.4. So there you have
it, we just went through the so-called lifecycle management with Helm, a release can exist for
months or years. And Helm can manage its lifecycle in many ways by keeping track of its current state,
previous states and bringing it into future states. So in this case, we brought the release into a
future state by upgrading it. But Helm kept a record of the previous state too, we noticed
the revision number changing to two. So the previous state would be revision one. Now how
does that help us? Let's take a look at our releases, run the Helm list command to list
the current releases. And we have our nginx release listed, we see the current revision
number which happens to be two. In this case, we know what the previous revision was and what the
current one is. But say we work in a big team and lots of people manage their releases. This output
doesn't really tell us what happened. So how do we dig deeper? Run the Helm history command to see
more details about a particular release. This is a lot more helpful, we can clearly see a lot of
useful things. What chart version was or is used in each revision, what app version was or is used
in each revision? What action actually created that revision? Was it an install, an upgrade, or
a rollback? So this paints a clear picture of the stages our release went through its lifecycle
history. Now let's assume this upgrade did something that we don't like. Helm's lifecycle
management allows for another cool thing called rollback. This lets us return a release to a
previous state. So in this case, we want to return to revision one. So in this case, we run the
command Helm rollback nginx release and specify the revision number that we want to roll back to.
And that is revision one. Now when you do that, remember Helm reverts all configuration to how it
was previously in revision one. But technically, it does not go back to revision one. Instead,
it creates a new revision tree with a similar configuration as in revision one. So if
you list Helm revisions, with the Helm history command, now you will see that there are three
versions with revision one and two having the same chart and the app versions and there is a note in
the description that says it's a rollback to revision one. It's worth mentioning that we chose nginx
here as it's simple to upgrade. But there will be Kubernetes packages that may require a few extra
steps to upgrade. For example, if we had tried to upgrade the previous WordPress release
that we created, we would have got this output. Now that's not to say that this is a problem.
It can be easily solved by adding some more parameters to the command line as instructed
in the text. But why does this happen? In this case, Helm cannot upgrade everything without
having access to some administrative passwords. It needs administrative access to the database
and to the WordPress website itself, so that it can get permissions to make necessary changes.
It's also worth mentioning that all the rollbacks are very similar to a backup restore feature,
it doesn't cover file or directory data that may be created by our applications. Instead,
Helm backs up and restores the declarations or manifest files of our Kubernetes objects.
So for things that use persistent volumes, or other forms of persistent data, or something
that is external, maybe like an external database, the rollback won't restore that data to,
for example, imagine your rollback MySQL database server, the MySQL Pods will be restored to their
previous states, software versions used, and so on. But the actual database, its data will remain
the same, its data is not going to be backed up or restored. So there are options available to
take consistent backups of databases before upgrading charts, or even to roll back or
restore databases. But they're done using what is known as Chart Hooks, which we will discuss
later in this course. Well, that's all for now, head over to the labs and get some hands-on practice.